>> Sreenivasan: IRAQI ARMY
TROOPS CONTINUE TO CLOSE IN ON
TAKING BACK CONTROL OF MOSUL
FROM ISIS MILITANTS, WHO
CAPTURED IT THREE YEARS AGO.
MOSUL WAS THE COUNTRY'S SECOND-
LARGEST CITY AFTER BAGHDAD.
ONE U.S. COMMANDER SAYS U.S.
ARMY FORCES ARE HELPING THE
IRAQIS IN A "VERY CLOSE FIGHT IN
THE STREETS OF MOSUL."
MANY OF THE TENS OF THOUSANDS OF
CIVILIANS TRAPPED BY THE
FIGHTING WITH LITTLE FOOD OR
WATER ARE NOW TRYING TO FLEE TO
SAFETY.
REUTERS REPORTER STEPHEN KALIN
IS COVERING THE CONFLICT AND
JOINS ME NOW VIA SKYPE FROM THE
IRAQI CITY OF IRBIL, ABOUT
60 MILES EAST OF MOSUL.
ON THURSDAY, THE IRAQI PRIME
MINISTER SAID BASICALLY VICTORY
HAS BEEN DECLARED OVER THE
CALIPHATE.
YOU WERE JUST THERE IN MOSUL
YESTERDAY.
WHAT'S IT LOOK LIKE?
>> FIGHTING IS ONGOING IN THE
OLD CITY OF MOSUL, WHICH IS A
CENTURIES-OLD DISTRICT OF THE
CITY.
THIS IS THE LAST AREA OF MOSUL
THAT THE ISLAMIC STATE STILL HAS
SOME PRESENCE IN.
IT'S GOING TO BE PRETTY GRIM.
REALLY NARROW ALLEYWAYS AND, YOU
KNOW, FIGHTING THAT GETS VERY
CLOSE...VERY CLOSE COMBAT.
>> Sreenivasan: TELL ME ABOUT
THE CIVILIANS THAT YOU SAW
THERE, THE ONES THAT WERE
FLEEING.
>> YEAH, WE WERE AT THE SITE OF
THE GRAND MOSQUE IN THE HEART OF
THE OLD CITY, WHICH IS WHERE
ISLAMIC STATE LEADER, ABU BAKR
AL-BAGHDADI, MADE HIS APPEARANCE
THREE YEARS AGO.
AND THIS IS WHERE WE SAW
CIVILIANS STREAMING OUT.
IT WAS A FEW DOZEN THAT WE SAW,
BUT I LATER HEARD THAT IT WAS
ACTUALLY 3,000 OVERALL YESTERDAY
THAT... THAT LEFT THE OLD CITY.
AND THEY WERE COMING OUT IN A
VERY DESPERATE STATE.
I'VE SEEN THOUSANDS AND
THOUSANDS OF RESIDENTS FLEEING
MOSUL FOR THE PAST EIGHT MONTHS,
AND THESE WERE BY FAR THE
WORST...IN WORST CONDITION.
>> Sreenivasan: WHY WOULD THEY
STAY THERE AS LONG AS THEY DID?
I MEAN, WERE SOME OF THEM BEING
HELD AGAINST THEIR WILL AS HUMAN
SHIELDS?
>> WELL, THE ISLAMIC STATE HAS
BEEN USING CIVILIANS AS... AS
HUMAN SHIELDS THIS ENTIRE TIME,
FOR THE ENTIRE BATTLE.
BECAUSE THEY KNOW THAT THE IRAQI
FORCES-- AND ESPECIALLY THE
INTERNATIONAL COALITION BACKING
THEM-- IS DOING EVERYTHING THEY
CAN TO PREVENT CIVILIAN
CASUALTIES, SO THEY'LL OFTEN
FORCE CIVILIANS TO STAY IN THE
LOWER GROUNDS OF A BUILDING AND
THEN PUT A SNIPER ON TOP SO THAT
THAT SNIPER IS... IS IN SOME
WAYS PROTECTED FROM MORTAR
ATTACKS OR AIR STRIKES.
>> Sreenivasan: TELL US A LITTLE
BIT ABOUT THIS MOSQUE AND WHY
IT'S SUCH AN IMPORTANT SYMBOL
THERE.
>> THE GRAND NURI MOSQUE IS AT
THE CENTER OF THE OLD CITY,AND
IT HAS BEEN AROUND... WHICH IS
840 YEARS OLD, WHICH IS... IS
LEANING, SORT OF LIKE THE
LEANING TOWER OF PISA.
DUE TO, WE THINK, STRUCTURAL
PROBLEMS, IT BEGAN LEANING VERY
SOON AFTER CONSTRUCTION.
SO, THIS IS AN ICONIC SITE IN
MOSUL.
IT IS ALSO WHERE ISLAMIC STATE
LEADER ABU BAKR AL-BAGHDADI CAME
IN JULY 2014 AND MADE THIS...
REALLY THE ONLY PUBLIC
APPEARANCE THAT WE KNOW OF,
CONFIRMED PUBLIC APPEARANCE, AND
PROCLAIMED HIMSELF THE CALIPH,
THE LEADER OF THE ISLAMIC STATE.
THIS IS THE PLACE WHERE HE CAME.
AND THE IRAQI FORCES WERE HOPING
TO GET TO THIS SITE, TAKE DOWN
THE... THE BLACK ISIS FLAG THAT
HAS BEEN HANGING THERE FOR THE
PAST THREE YEARS, AND STRING UP
THE... THE TRI-COLOR IRAQI FLAG
AS A REALLY SYMBOLIC SIGN OF
VICTORY.
THEY WEREN'T ABLE TO DO THAT
BECAUSE, JUST OVER A WEEK AGO
NOW, THE ISLAMIC STATE RIGGED
THE... THE ENTIRE COMPLEX WITH
EXPLOSIVES AND BLEW IT UP.
THE ONLY PART OF THE MOSQUE THAT
WAS STILL INTACT WAS THE... THE
DOME UNDER WHICH BAGHDADI STOOD
AND MADE THAT MESSAGE THREE
YEARS AGO.
>> Sreenivasan: NOW, THE IRAQI
FORCES THAT YOU SPEAK TO, WHAT'S
THE NEXT STEP?
LET'S SAY, BEST-CASE SCENARIO,
THEY RETAKE THE CITY; IT'S IN
RUINS RIGHT NOW.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
THE INFRASTRUCTURE IN MOSUL IS
VERY HEAVILY DAMAGED.
WHERE THERE IS ELECTRICITY AND
WATER, IT'S USUALLY PROVIDED BY
GENERATORS OR WATER TRUCKS.
BASIC INFRASTRUCTURE IS NOT
THERE.
SO, THE BATTLE CONTINUES, AND
SECURITY AND STABILITY--
MAINTAINING THAT-- REALLY, IS
GOING TO BE A... A TRICK FOR THE
SECURITY FORCES, AS WELL.
WE'RE ALMOST 100% SURE THAT THE
ISLAMIC STATE HAS LEFT SLEEPER
CELLS, THAT... THAT SOME OF
THEIR FIGHTERS HAVE BLENDED IN
WITH THE CIVILAIAN POPULATION.
AND SO, WE EXPECT THAT, YOU
KNOW, THERE WILL BE SOME SORT OF
A... OF A RETURN TO INSURGENT
ATTACKS, AND THAT'LL BE TASK
NUMBER ONE FOR THE SECURITY
FORCES TO... TO HANDLE.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
STEPHEN KALIN OF REUTERS JOINING
US VIA SKYPE FROM IRBIL TONIGHT.
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANKS FOR HAVING ME.